Introducing YDB Essential Metrics Dashboard (#38031)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/reference/observability/metrics/grafana-dashboards.md

| VDisks count | Number of available VDisks in the cluster, in units |

### Saturation {#ydbessentials-saturation}

This section contains panels showing database resource utilization.

| Name | Description |
|---|---|
| CPU by thread pool (dynnodes) | CPU consumption by dynamic nodes broken down by [execution pools](../../../devops/configuration-management/configuration-v2/config-settings.md#tuneconfig), in CPU cores |
| CPU utilization (dynnodes) | CPU utilization by dynamic nodes broken down by [execution pools](../../../devops/configuration-management/configuration-v2/config-settings.md#tuneconfig), in % |
| Elapsed Time vs CPU Time | Ratio of real elapsed operation time (`ElapsedMicrosec`) to CPU time (`CpuMicrosec`) by node. Persisting value above 100% means sessions spend time waiting rather than actively executing; this is typically caused by I/O waits or CPU overcommit on the hypervisor side. |
| RSS size by node | Amount of RAM (Resident set size) consumed by each dynamic node, with cgroup memory limits, in bytes |
| Storage usage | Total logical database size and its limit (if set), in bytes |

> | Overloaded shards count | Number of DataShards experiencing [CPU overload](../../../troubleshooting/performance/schemas/overloaded-shards.md) (from 50% to 100%). Helps assess the level of system overload. |

Reviewer: Panel name in `ydb-essentials.json` is **"Overloaded shard count"** (singular). Also improving description to match the RU version (more specific about grouping).

```suggestion
| Overloaded shard count | Number of DataShards experiencing [CPU overload](../../../troubleshooting/performance/schemas/overloaded-shards.md), grouped by CPU load range (from 50% to 100%), in units |
```

This section provides panels for analyzing the database workload.

| Name | Description |
|---|---|
| Queries per second by latency buckets | Number of queries per second broken down by latency ranges (from 1 ms to +∞). Each range is highlighted with a separate color — from green for fast queries to purple for slow ones. Helps assess latency distribution and overall RPS, in req/s |
| Transactions per second by latency buckets | Number of transactions per second broken down by latency ranges (from 1 ms to +∞). Each range is highlighted with a separate color — from green for fast transactions to purple for slow ones. Helps assess latency distribution and overall TPS, in tx/s |
| Rows read, uploaded, updated, deleted | Number of table row operations per second: reads, inserts, updates, and deletes, in ops/s |
| Session count by dynnode | Number of active sessions on each dynamic node, in units |

### Latency {#ydbessentials-latency}

This section contains panels showing query and transaction execution time.

| Name | Description |
|---|---|
| Queries per second by latency buckets | Query execution time percentiles p50, p90, p95, p99, in milliseconds |

> | Transactions per second by latency buckets | Transaction execution time percentiles p50, p90, p95, p99, in milliseconds |

Reviewer: **[CRITICAL]** Panel names in the Latency section are copy-pasted from the Traffic section and don't match the actual Grafana dashboard JSON (`Query latency percentiles (ms)` and `Transaction latency percentiles (ms)`).

```suggestion
| Query latency percentiles (ms) | Query execution time percentiles p50, p90, p95, p99, in milliseconds |
| Transaction latency percentiles (ms) | Transaction execution time percentiles p50, p90, p95, p99, in milliseconds |
```
